Spectral v4 blog post (#966)
stoplightio/stoplight.io: netlify/blog-posts/more-flexible-json-linting-with-spectral-4-0.md

---
path: /spectral-v4
tags:
  - {}
relatedTags:
  - {}
publishedDate: 2019-07-11T00:19:11.840Z
author: Taylor Barnett
title: More Flexible JSON Linting with Spectral 4.0
subtitle: Ruleset improvements and more CLI focus provide a better experience
image: /images/dennis-brekke-z0tb7rr4xx4-unsplash.jpg
color: purple-dark
tabs:
  - {}
includeToc: true
disqus:
  enabled: true
actionBar:
  buttons:
    - color: purple
  enabled: true
meta:
  robots: 'index, follow'
  twitter: {}
---
Since last March after our [release](https://stoplight.io/blog/introducing-spectral/) of Spectral, we have heard some amazing feedback from the community. There was one resonating topic, and that was around customization for each of your unique use cases. We listened closely and thanks to your feedback, we have released a brand new update that we would love to share with you.

Some of these updates include: 
- Using the CLI with multiple, custom rulesets
- New syntax for rulesets, including overriding rules and extending rulesets
- More friendly errors and warnings
- More options for documents and rules

> We’re excited for you to [try](https://github.com/stoplightio/spectral) them out!

Reviewer: Maybe this link should go to the new page with the interactive playground?

Author: Yup, will change now that it is about to be live.

## Use the CLI with multiple, custom rulesets

We found that most Spectral users would prefer to lint their documents from the command line, so we’ve added the ability to run Spectral with custom rulesets from the CLI. 

Rulesets are now a first class concept. In earlier versions, customizing Spectral with your own rules and functions used to require a very hands-on TypeScript approach. In our latest release, have now introduced YAML rulesets which allow you to do the same thing without needing to know TypeScript.

```yaml
rules:
  my-rule-name:
    description: Tags must have a description.
    given: $.tags[*]
    severity: error
    then:
      field: description
      function: truthy
```

For example, if you have created a ruleset file called `company-ruleset.yaml`, you can run it on the CLI like this: 

```shell
spectral lint foo.yaml --ruleset=path/to/company-ruleset.yaml
```

You can also now run multiple rulesets like this:

```shell
spectral lint foo.yaml --ruleset=path/to/company-ruleset.yaml --ruleset=http://example.com/common-ruleset.yaml
```

> You can read more on how to write your rules in YAML [here](https://github.com/stoplightio/spectral/blob/master/docs/rulesets.md). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read more on how to write your rules in YAML [on the documentation page](https://github.com/stoplightio/spectral/blob/master/docs/rulesets.md). 
```

Author: Will do.

```shell
spectral lint foo.yaml --skip-rule=skip-rule-name
```

But that’s not all! You can also now disable rules in your ruleset file too. This would make more sense if you are disabling many rules at once. 

Hopefully, you won’t be skipping too many rules though. 😉 

## New quiet flag

We heard from the community that a quiet flag would be useful. Before, you could choose to use the `--output` flag when using the Spectral CLI, but if you were running Spectral in a script, it made your script output still kind of messy because of all of the logging that Spectral can do. So we added a `--quiet` flag that will only show the results, not the logging, so you have more flexibility with the CLI.  

## Breaking changes

There’s a few breaking changes you might want to take note of if you have been using Spectral programmatically since 2.x (or 3.x) was released. 

First, `oas2/index.ts#rules()` is now async. We’ve updated examples in the documentation accordingly. 

> Second, configuration files were briefly available in 3.x. These have been removed in 4.x. We definitely see the need to have config files (possibly in 5.x), but we want to work on a better approach. You can see some of the discussion around what it might look like in the future here if you are interested or have an opinion to share.

Reviewer 2: > We definitely see the need to have config files (possibly in 5.x), but we want to work on a better approach. You can see some of the discussion around what it might look like in the future here if you are interested or have an opinion to share.

We are not planning to bring back config files, at least not in the near future.
What I meant in the draft is that we are planning to make rulesets even more powerful in the future.

Author: I'll make it more clear. I knew what you meant, but I didn't write it clearly.
